From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroof. This is the daily.
[Music]
Across the country, public schools are
facing massive declines in enrollment
while the movement to use public funds
for private education grows.
Today, my colleague Dana Goldstein
explains why so many parents are using
taxpayer money to privately educate
their children and how their choices
will transform the future of American
education.
[Music]
[Applause]
It's Wednesday, August 20th.
[Music]
Dana, you're a longtime education
reporter here at the Times. You have
become a reference point, I think, for a
lot of people on what is happening with
schooling in the United States. And
you've been covering what's been
described as a sea change in the way
America approaches K through 12
education. So tell me about that change.
For the longest time, the debate among
policy makers was about improving public
schools. How can policymakers help
public schools do a better job, do
better academically for kids, do better
socially for kids? But over the past few
years, I've been looking at one of the
biggest shifts I've observed in almost
20 years as an education reporter. And
that is because a big idea has gotten
more energy than ever before. and that
is that instead of putting all of our
efforts into making public schools
better, we should be spending more money
on giving parents more opportunities to
basically escape public schools to put
their kids in homeschooling or private
education.
>> And what does that look like on a policy
level?
>> Well, basically it looks like some form
of a private school voucher, some way
that parents can spend taxpayer dollars
to send their kids to private school or
to homeschool them. And over the past
five years, we have doubled the number
of students using some form of a private
school voucher. And now more than 1
million American kids are using public
dollars for some form of private
education. And this is starting to have
a big impact on the public school system
that we're beginning to really take a
close look at this school year.
>> And what is it exactly? What are you
seeing? So over the past few years,
according to data that we've analyzed,
23 of traditional public schools have
lost enrollment numbers.
>> Wow. A lot.
>> Yes. And there are two reasons for that.
The first is that Americans are having
fewer children than before. So it makes
sense that if the child population is
going down, public schools will lose
enrollment. But just as that is
happening, there's this explosion of
school choice which is brought on in
part by the availability of these
vouchers. And we are seeing a lot of
growth in the private education sector
and in homeschooling. And when a kid
uses one of these vouchers to leave a
public school, they take with them
public money that would otherwise go to
public education. And this has grown to
the point that we're beginning to see
real impacts on public schools and a
major shift in how parents think about
educating their children. And that is
the culmination of years of work from
conservative activists and donors.
>> Okay, let's talk about that history.
Let's roll the tape back. How did all
this start? Well, vouchers are a really
old idea, but if you go back to the
1990s, the idea was that vouchers should
be available to the kids who maybe
needed another option most, those with
disabilities who were not being
adequately served in the public school
system, perhaps low-income children who
were zoned for underperforming schools.
And then there was another argument that
was frequently put forth which was that
if we introduced more competition into
the education sector perhaps public
schools would improve when forced to
compete more with private education.
>> H
>> however the sort of organizing idea
behind the private school choice
movement really started to shift during
the co 19 pandemic.
>> How so? I mean, I obviously remember
very well that during the pandemic,
there was all of this kind of anger from
parents around school closure, around
masking. There was all this debate. How
how did that interact with this
movement?
>> Remember, parents were dissatisfied
on many different levels during co
>> we risk losing an entire generation to
the pandemic. It could be that their
schools were closed for in-person
learning and they wanted them to be
open.
>> Our lives have been upended. It could be
that their schools were open and they
thought that that wasn't cautious
enough.
>> Putting critical race theory into our
classrooms is taking our nation in the
wrong direction.
>> Some parents watching their students
learn virtually on video from home did
not like what they saw. or they may have
just thought I don't think the teacher
is teaching my child effectively. But
all of this frustration and angst about
schooling that really came to the four
during the co 19 pandemic sort of
supercharged what many conservatives had
been fighting for which was a much more
universal view of the school voucher.
So through a combination of grassroots
activism and support from conservative
donors and philanthropists, a string of
Republican leaning states during the CO9
pandemic start to pass laws for
something called a universal education
savings account. It is a type of voucher
that's available to almost anybody. very
few restrictions on income.
>> And there are now policies like this in
18 Republican leaning states. Wow.
>> A debate is raging at the state capital
over universal school vouchers. We see
states like West Virginia.
>> Here, kids are not trapped in failing
schools.
>> Arizona, Florida.
>> Parents, you're in charge of your kids'
education.
and most recently Texas embraced this
vision of a universal or near universal
education savings account.
>> And we want, as you know, we want to
bring education back to the states. And
most recently, we even see a federal
program that will be a form of private
school choice potentially nationally for
the first time
>> with the one big beautiful bill we're
delivering both empowering hundreds of
thousands of families to choose the
public private charter religious school
or the home school of their choice. And
uh
>> on July 4th when President Trump signed
his budget bill, included in there was a
tax credit that would go to fund private
school vouchers potentially across the
country.
[Music]
When we look at the programs passed in
the Republican states, how much money
are they giving parents?
The vouchers are getting more generous
as this movement becomes more popular.
It could be $5,000 also. It could be
$7,000 8,000. It could be$10,000. And
for some students with disabilities, it
could be up to $30,000 per year.
>> Oh wow.
>> And often the laws are written to really
include a broad variety of expenses. So,
for example, I could pay for traditional
private school tuition, but it can also
be spent on a computer that your child
would use to do their homeschooling from
home, or it could be spent on the test
fee to take the SAT or an advanced
placement exam. And and I'd imagine when
you're multiplying that whatever five
six $7,000 by many, many kids, at the
end of the day, you're talking about a
lot of money coming out of public
budgets. Yes, a lot of money coming out
of state budgets for these programs and
a lot of debate about whether this is a
good use of public dollars. Let's get
into that debate. What are the critics
saying now that these voucher programs
have taken hold in a in a larger swath
of the country?
>> Well, there are some arguments against
vouchers which are perennial and have
existed for decades. So, for example,
they don't pay necessarily for the full
price of private school tuition. So
therefore, it's really mostly upper
middle class and affluent families who
can take advantage of these to go to
many private schools.
>> In other words, you might be able to use
this money for the private education
that you're already paying for out of
pocket with no problem. And then there's
the question of accountability for
private education. Private schools do
not have to follow the same
accountability rules that public schools
do. Private schools are not required by
law to educate disabled students with
all the supports that they need. Private
schools can reject anybody they want.
They're not required to serve everybody.
And so all of this means that private
schools are more and more taking public
money but not being held to exactly the
same standards.
>> Right? And then of course there's the
major concern about the impact all of
this will have on public schools because
public schools are funded on a per pupil
basis. When a single child withdraws,
they take many thousands of dollars with
them,
>> but the school is still open. It still
needs to maintain its HVAC system, fix
the roof, pay the principal,
>> keep the lights on.
>> Yes. So, if the school is going to
remain open with fewer kids, it's going
to be doing everything it needs to do
with less money. And that is a big
argument that opponents of vouchers have
made for many years. But what's
interesting is there are new critiques
as this money is increasingly being
spent on homeschooling, which is the
question of is the money being spent on
truly educational purposes? In some of
the states, parents have attempted to
collect reimbursements for say buying a
trampoline, which they have said is part
of their physical education curriculum
in their homeschool or visiting a theme
park because they've said they took
their homeschooled student on a field
trip. So, of course, when the local
media has dug into some of these
receipts, they have found some examples
that have provoked some outrage.
So, if we set aside the trampoline
purchases for a moment and just focus on
the fears about how vouchers are going
to impact the public education system
and what actually is going to replace
those options for kids.
That's not a theoretical question
anymore, right? This has been now in
practice for years, you've told us. So,
how do you determine what the impact
actually has been on the ground? Great
question. A lot of this is pretty new,
but one place where the impacts are
really visible is Florida.
That's where more students than in any
other state are using some form of a
private school voucher.
[Music]
So, I went to Orlando, which has one of
the state's largest school districts, to
really see how this is playing out.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Dana, you go to Florida. You think this
is going to be a place where you really
see the impact of this because, as you
said, so many parents are using these
vouchers. What do you find when you get
there? Well, what I found is a 25%
expected decline in the size of the
incoming kindergarten class in the
Orange County Public Schools in Orlando
>> this year.
>> Yes, for this school year, which is
starting right now. And this equals
about a $28 million funding decrease.
So, it is significant for the schools.
And what's really interesting is also
what I saw with my own eyes, which is
when you drive down the highway, you
just see housing booming up.
>> There's a lot of new housing
construction and data shows that
families are moving to Orlando in pretty
significant numbers. It's a popular
place to live. And yet still, even
though the Orlando area defies some of
these trends in terms of a decreasing
child population, the public schools are
experiencing disenrollment. So there are
132 elementary schools in Orange County
and 107 of them have experienced
enrollment declines. And so we know that
the private school choice, the voucher
programs in Florida are playing a very
significant role.
>> And who are all these families that are
leaving the public school system?
>> What's really interesting is that it
cuts across demographic divides. What
the data shows is that schools are
losing population in lowincome urban
neighborhoods in Orlando and also in
some of the affluent suburban areas near
the theme parks. And that's what I'm
finding as I go out across the country
and talk to parents who are either using
some form of a private school voucher or
want to be. They're not down the line
Republicans in any way. They really run
the gamut in terms of their political
identity, their race, their class, and
they have a lot of different reasons for
why they would like to use a voucher.
What did parents tell you about why
they're opting out?
>> So, almost all the parents I interviewed
were considering something other than
their neighborhood public school.
>> And many of them talked about two themes
over and over again.
The first was academic rigor. They
wanted their children to be challenged
and they had the perception fair or not
that their children would not be
adequately challenged in public
education. And the other really big
theme that came out was perceptions of
safety. Many parents told me that
especially middle schools they perceived
as sort of out of control behaviorally.
They weren't sure their kids would be
really safe and well cared for and they
were looking for a different
environment.
>> So in these conversations, it sounds
like you're hearing parents saying the
public schools are failing my kid. Is
that true? Is there any way of getting
at that?
>> You know, I think what the parents were
saying was not exactly the public
schools are failing my kid, but I fear
that they will.
And I think it's important to say that
there's no reason to believe that this
public school district in Orlando is
extraordinarily bad. In fact, the
opposite is true. 75%
of the schools have an A or B rating
from the state of Florida. So, of
course, like any large district, there
are some underperforming schools.
There's some racial segregation within
the school system and class segregation.
But in many ways, this is a typical
large school district.
>> So when those families vote with their
feet, when they take their kids out of
the public system, where do they go?
>> Well, first let's talk about where they
mostly aren't going. Because if you have
a voucher worth, say, 7 to $10,000 per
year, that is not going to buy you the
cost of a really academically elite
private school,
>> right? Of course, the vast majority of
private schools in Florida and across
the country are Christian or Catholic
schools, and those are receiving many of
these voucher dollars. But what's really
interesting nationally is that the
private school traditional
brickandmortar sector is not really
growing to meet the new demand created
by these voucher programs. And so we
really see a lot of growth in
nontraditional private education. Here's
what that looks like. It could be a
micro school, which is, you know, a
private for-profit one room schoolhouse
type model. I have visited some of
these. It could be run out of the
teacher's house.
>> Oh wow.
>> It could be rented space in a strip mall
and it could cost 5 or $6,000 a year.
There might be seven or 12 kids in
there. Another thing that's really
growing is virtual schooling, which is
for profofit. And we see venture capital
money flowing into this sector and
really growing it up. But these are
programs that homeschoolers often enroll
in to help their parents guide them
through the curriculum at home. So this
private school market expands. People
flock to it. How is the Orlando school
district responding? Because this sounds
like an exodus from the public system.
Yes, they are trying some really
non-traditional things.
One of the things I did while I was down
there was traverse the city with a team
of consultants who are from a private
company that recruits students to public
education.
>> Whoa.
>> Yes. So, they're basically out there
with flyers and information about the
public school district and they're
looking for parents. It could be at a
Boys and Girls Club. They could visit a
preschool, a playground, and they're
saying, "Hey, are you considering school
options for your child? Let me tell you
about all of the great things that are
happening in Orange County public
schools." So, districts are hiring
companies like this to actually market
themselves essentially.
>> Doortodoor salesman for public schools.
It's kind of remarkable. What is their
pitch?
>> So, they really target their pitch to
what parents are looking for. So if the
mom says, you know, I work till 6:00, I
really need after school child care,
they'll be prepared to talk about the
after school options. If the parent
says, I really want my high school kid
to earn college credit, they can talk
about dual enrollment with the local
community college or the advanced
placement program. So they're really
listening to what parents have to say,
but they also make some anti-private
school arguments that might be
controversial. If a parent says, "I'm
looking for a small class size," they
will say, "Look, there's very little or
no research that shows that a small
class size leads to better outcomes in
adulthood." And this speaks to the fact
that this is now a much more competitive
marketplace. For 100 years, public
schools have had a near monopoly. And
that has really changed in Florida.
If parents are leaving public schools
because they think they can do better
for their kids, which is what you're
hearing, do we have any insight into
whether they actually are doing better
for their kids? Are their kids doing
better academically? In other words, is
the promise of school choice paying off?
>> This is such a crucial question. And
what is really frustrating for me as an
education reporter is right now there is
not a strong consensus on what the
answer to that question is. There have
been some studies of what happens after
a child accepts a voucher.
Unfortunately, they've come to
conflicting conclusions. One study out
of Ohio seemed to suggest that kids who
took a voucher did better in terms of
attending and graduating from college
than similar peers that didn't use a
voucher. But a study from Louisiana came
to a very different conclusion. It
showed that students with a voucher did
worse on math standardized tests. So
this is something that researchers are
continuing to look at with great
interest and I'm going to be continuing
to track as a reporter. Hm. But to step
back a second, the proponents of these
programs are not really making the
argument that they're going to lead to
higher test scores or better academic
outcomes that are measurable for
students. It's much bigger than that.
They're making an argument about
parental rights, about parental choice,
that every family should choose for
themselves what works best for their
individual child. and they get to define
what success looks like. And this is a
really big philosophical shift from
where education politics was in the very
recent past, which was all about helping
kids learn more, raising their test
scores. In some ways, it sounds like the
measure of success isn't precisely about
kids achievement per se, but whether
parents are happy, which to a certain
extent makes sense, right? I mean, like,
we should expect parents to want to be
satisfied with the education that their
children are getting.
>> Yes. And I totally get that. I have two
kids in public school and I'm always
wondering if they're being well served
and looking for more information about
what's going on in their classroom and
thinking, are they being challenged? Are
there social emotional needs being met?
But whether it's me or any other parent,
we make these assessments about schools
with imperfect information. I mean,
there's a lot of rumors and gossip in a
neighborhood about what's going on in a
school that may or may not align with
reality, and there can be a real gap
between perception and reality when it
comes to the quality of public
education. Dana, I want to ask a
political question here given the
popularity of these programs, which
you've told us about and which you said
cuts across demographic lines and
appeals to many workingclass families.
What are Democrats to do in this
scenario? Because it seems like a very
tricky political situation for them
because on the one hand, they don't want
to alienate workingclass voters who
support this, but on the other, it's
been a core value of the Democratic
party to uphold and support the public
education system. This is an incredibly
tricky emerging issue for Democrats.
Polls suggest that while white liberals
feel pretty negatively about private
school vouchers, a lot of working-class
black and Hispanic parents are
interested in them. And in fact, many of
the parents who I interviewed in Orlando
who are excited to use a voucher were
black and Hispanic. We spoke earlier
about President Trump signing into law
the first sort of national federal
private school choice program,
>> right? Governors will have the
opportunity to opt in or out to decide
if their states are going to accept that
money. Now, Democratic governors are
facing a really difficult choice.
They're going to have a lot of pressure
from constituencies like teachers unions
to not provide vouchers for private
school tuition. However, they are also
hearing from those within the Democratic
party who are urging a new approach, one
that would tune into the fact that
workingclass black and Hispanic parents,
those same voters who we know tilted
toward President Trump in last year's
election, are excited about school
choice. And if even a single Democratic
governor chooses to participate in the
Trump private school scholarship
program, there will be pressure on
others to participate. Pulling back, I
want to ask what it means to have public
schools in this world where we have this
system that pours taxpayer dollars into
vouchers that funnel people into private
schools. There are practical
implications that we've talked about,
but what I want to know is as a country,
what does it mean about how we see now
the function of education in America?
>> So, I think this gets to some of the
deepest ideological divides in our
country. If you see education as an
issue of parental empowerment and
parental rights, you are going to love
the moment we're in with the expansion
of vouchers and private school choice.
However, it's worth pointing out that
this is in deep contradiction to some of
the sort of fundamental founding
principles of public education in the
United States.
If you go back to the 1830s and the
birth of the common schools movement and
a man named Horus man who was sort of
the father of public education in
America, his idea was that you would
take children across lines of
difference, religion, class, later on of
course race being a crucial line of
difference that we're supposed to cross
in the classroom. Bring all these kids
together and inculcate in them shared
values. Prepare them together across
differences for citizenship in a
democracy. Make sure that our future
voters and future workers have great
reading comprehension skills. Now, as a
country, did we live up to these
beautiful ideals? Often we did not.
Often we kept kids in schools that were
segregated by race in class. Often kids
graduated without great reading skills,
without great math skills, and there has
been a lot of cynicism about public
education. But many people still hold
fast to these ideals of common
schooling. However, the private school
choice movement is moving so quickly
that it is worth pausing to consider
whether education in America could look
drastically different within our
lifetimes.
>> Well, Dana, thanks so much for coming on
the show.
>> Thanks so much for having me, Natalie.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
White House press secretary Caroline
Levit said on Tuesday that President
Vladimir Putin of Russia had agreed to
meet with Ukrainian President Vladimir
Zalinski, something Moscow hasn't
confirmed. Trump has touted the
potential meeting between the two
leaders as an achievement of Monday's
day of diplomacy with European leaders
who visited Washington to discuss terms
for ending the war in Ukraine. But the
Kremlin downplayed any potential for
face-to-face peace talks. Russian state
media barely mentioned any possibility
of Putin and Zalinski sitting down
together on Tuesday. And Russia's
foreign minister said that while Russia
wasn't against such a meeting, any
contacts involving top officials would
have to be prepared very carefully.
World leaders have been trying to hammer
out security guarantees to protect a
post-war Ukraine, including potentially
sending European soldiers to the country
as peacekeepers.
Trump has said American troops would not
be sent to Ukraine as part of any deal.
>> I just want to end it. I want to end it.
You know, we're not losing American
lives. We're not losing American
soldiers. We're losing Russian and
Ukrainian, mostly soldiers, some people.
And in an interview on Fox and Friends
on Tuesday, the president gave new
insight into his efforts to broker an
end to the war.
>> You know, when if I can save 7,000
people a week from being killed, I think
that's a pretty I want to try and get to
heaven if possible. I I'm hearing I'm
not doing well. I hear I'm really at the
bottom of the totem pole.
>> But if I can get to heaven, this will be
one of the reasons. Well, I think I
saved a lot.
>> He said his motivation was salvation.
Today's episode was produced by Eric
Krupkkey and Diana Wyn with help from
Sydney Harper and Mary Wilson. It was
edited by Lexi Dio and MJ Davis Lynn and
was engineered by Chris Wood.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroof. See you tomorrow.
[Music]